pretty much and thank you all for
joining us again today's webinar centers
on a common problem faced by engineers
and contractors and owners who are
dealing with an exasperated situation or
situations that are associated with
improper border venting the causes are
varied leading to an array of damaging
and expensive consequences which if the
causes were better understood upfront
that they could be avoided so during
this webinar today we're going to be for
time purposes we're going to limit our
discussion to force draft natural
gas-fired commercial and industrial
borders both condensing and the
non-condensing type we're going to first
look at the problems associated with
poor venting systems and then discuss
the major causes so problems first then
the cause is associated with these
problems well then get into the proper
design considerations and conclude with
Chuck solving two specific exhausting
problem scenarios and they of course
would incorporate some of the design
principles that I'll be discussing
before he gets into the scenarios so
beginning with the problems caused by
improper boiler exhaust venting the when
we consider improperly engineered new or
existing systems which have been changed
or attitude without considering the
increased mass flow and the temperature
associated with these changes we're
going to run into problems such as you
see here so these are the common
problems efficiency loss boiler damage
increase border maintenance and so on
and it's because we're not taking
certain things into consideration when
we are laying this this breaching and
stack system out so if we take a look at
at the first three efficiency loss
boiler damage and increased border
maintenance
let's just concentrate on those first
when we see that we've got efficiency
loss and I keep driving this home in our
seminars we've got to remember that a
border will consume four times its
initial cost in fuel consumption a year
that kind of puts things in perspective
so you may ask well okay that's fine
Steve but how does border venting
reaching and stack sizing affect
efficiency and that's a good question so
let's look at that here you see a border
we took a picture of this
this border was in excellent condition
as a matter of fact about a month or two
before this border was opened and you
see what you see here it was tuned up
proper fuel air ratio everything was
fine you can take a look at the rear
door here there's no signs of cracking
or anything else this border was
well-maintained and it was tuned up what
they did is they added another border
downstream of it they ducted it into the
breaching before it hit the stack and
this caused a lot of back pressure
because we had increased mass flow in
that breaching it caused a huge pressure
drop resistance to flow that impacted
the fuel-air ratio and we started
setting up now you can't see it very
well here in this slide but what
happened is we overheated that pressure
vessel and those tubes began to push
away from the weld and crack so it led
to a pressure vessel repair that you see
here because of that suit being
deposited on the heat transfer surfaces
it impeded the heat transfer and as a
result the pressure vessel loaded
overheated the tubes extended and the
welds cracked now another thing that we
have to concern ourselves with is
condensation that will build up in the
breaching or the stack that can an
impact not just the breaching in stack
itself if it's not of the proper
material but also the boiler itself if
you take a look here you see the vent
outlet
which is welded to the shell extension
of this fire - boiler the hot gases come
out and go up through this vent if we
get into a condensing situation this is
carbon steel it's going to begin to
corrode not just the vent but the border
extension itself so here you see a good
shot of that of that border vent coming
out of the shell extension right here
you can see it's carbon steel and how it
could definitely corrode with
condensation building up and dripping
down now the next thing is we want to
three things that we want to look at is
damage breaching and stacks production
downtime and increased operating cost
these are the problems that we're facing
now with a poorly designed stack and
breaching arrangement if we use the
wrong material for the stack itself this
can lead to some serious problems not
just in terms of repair but downtime I
can't tell you the number of instances
that I've seen carbon steel breaching
and stack being used for boilers that
get into very very close condensing
situations and have some real problems
at the result so and that's got to be
replaced various sections have to
replace obviously the boiler is down and
if you don't have standby your
production also is impeded so downtime
becomes a real problem and it's can be
directly associated with stacks another
problem that can lead to downtime is as
you increase that pressure in the stack
and breaching you've got that in that
pressure now being imposed upon the
burner itself we get into pilot problems
we also get into situations where we
have flameouts if that restriction is
large enough so those are other problems
that can can lead to not just
maintenance issues but expensive
downtime is as well
so if we take a look and we're in a very
very competitive situation in this
country today it's it's a world economy
that we deal in manufacturers
industrials have to control their costs
and if you take a look at the total
spend as far as operating expenses in a
plant are concerned you can see that one
of the biggest contributors to cost of
course is fuel the thing that we have to
keep in mind that a boiler system is
like a body and if any one of the organs
in the body is compromised in any way
the body itself of course does not
function properly the same with a border
system the stack and breaching are just
as much a part of the system as the
burner is as the controls are it's
extremely important so it impacts fuel
it also impacts services in and out the
supplies the repairs and improvements
all of these cost areas can be impacted
by improper stack and breaching design
so what are the causes of the major
problems well there's a number of causes
and the first thing that we're going to
be looking at today would be poor design
under undersized for the duty borders
have been added too much resistance so
we'll be looking at these three right
here boiler is added undersized for for
the duty and towards design let's look
at those first here is a good example of
here's a good example of a breaching
arrangement that has certainly not been
laid out properly
you can see that we've got a appliance
here and then we're coming across with a
common breaching picking up a couple of
units and not enlarging that breaching
as we increase the mass flow so that is
a telltale sign right there that we're
going to have
some significant problems as far as
overpressure is concerned now here's
another situation where we you can see
we've got a carbon steel stack here but
that's not really the issue the issue is
that I've got a boiler here that was put
in and then another one was added and if
you look closely we do not have any
expanders here
there's no expander before it goes into
the vertical stack itself now in this
particular case that's not a problem and
the reason is because the vertical stack
to which this breaching is connected and
these two borders are being vented into
is tall enough to overcome that
resistance so we still have enough
negative to be able to vent the products
of combustion
what about environmental variances
external conditions and external
conditions those those two just before
wrong material here you see a situation
where we've got a tall stack as a matter
of fact those two boilers that I just
showed you before that are being ducted
commonly into that breaching and then
into the stack this is the stack right
here now should it have should it have a
cap on it here's the problem we've got a
number of conditions that will impact
the amount of draft the pressure density
differential within the stack itself
things like ambient temperature relative
humidity wind velocities and barometric
barometric pressure so the design
engineer when he's looking at laying out
or she's looking at laying out a
breaching and stack arrangement they
take these things into consideration to
make sure that we've got zero to
slightly negative at the vent stubs of
these boilers to be able to adequately
vent the products of combustion here you
see if if we put a stacks here's another
problem this this would be an external
condition let's say that we were coming
through this this
the ceiling right here of this roof
right here with a stack where the arrow
is pointing notice this this column next
to it this could induce a downdraft so
that would have to be taken into
consideration either we would take that
stack up above this column a couple of
stories higher or we would have to have
certainly a cap on top of it but then
remember that as soon as we put a cap on
top of a stack we've now introduced
another restriction we've got a 90
degree Bend now that those products of
combustion which is nothing more than a
fluid have to bend and of course when
they when they when they turn to go out
underneath that tap
that's another resistance and we'll add
linear feet to the overall calculation
so what about the wrong material that's
another common cause of problems
maintenance problems downtime and so on
when we look at the venting material for
boilers we can break them into four
categories we've got category 1 which
would be atmospheric really an
atmospheric type condition where you've
got a total negative within the within
the stack and breaching all the time and
it's non condensing and we've got
category 2 which could be pressurized
but also non-condensing category 3 would
be positive vent pressure but
non-condensing so many fire tube and
water tube borders would fall under that
category especially when you're talking
about process steam they're going if
you've got a forced draft of order
burner combination it is going to be
venting into a category 3 vent
arrangement if you will
it'll be non condensing but pressurized
because it's got a fourth draft burner
if we get into condensing boilers hot
hot water
hydronic heating that's going to be a
category 4 because they are designed to
condense so the the 3 category 2
categories that we are going to be
be concentrating on today for time
reasons will be the category three in
category 4 so pressurized non-condensing
category 3 and category 4 which will be
condensing and pressurized positive
event now looking at some examples of
those we see we have a category 3 which
would be this particular border of flex
tube water to border flex water to
border
got a power burner we're talking
category 3 because it is positive
pressure and non-condensing this border
right here is a hot water border but it
is near a condensing in other words it's
about probably operating around 87 88
percent fuel to water efficiency so
you're going to have a certain amount of
condensing in that particular situation
so we would go with a category 4
material because of that condensing
possibility and the possibility of
corrosion if we don't have stainless
steel material that would be coming in
contact with that flue gas and here's
another category 4 this is a full
condensing boiler that operates with
category 4 material all the time so I'm
saying if you get into a near condensing
situation you want to go with category 4
as well as a condensing boarder of
course has to go with category 4 now the
other thing is certification with these
materials it's highly recommended by the
industry not just cleaver Brooks that
the material be ul certified so with the
certification in the States its ul 1738
and in Canada it's u LCS - 636 and as
you can see in the in the bold letters
here in the bold type gas temperatures
not exceeding 550 degrees with a maximum
rated positive pressure of 15 inches of
water column that would fall under the
category UL 1730 1738 and UL cs6
thirty-six in Canada and this is what
the label would look like on the
material on the breaching sections and
the stacked sections you would find a
label that looks very very similar to
this now as far as the materials are
concerned if we're looking at the
materials of construction you see that
they're stainless steel either 301 or
304 316 or 316 L which is low-carbon and
also there's an aluminized steel type
430 the aluminized steel is on the
outside so we've got a double wall we've
got the stainless steel comprised of the
stainless steel material that you see
here and then we've got the outer wall
which is an aluminized steel in between
we have either one or two inches of
insulation that can either be air or
mineral fiber wool or ceramic fiber air
of course would give you the least
amount of our factor if you will in
terms of insulating value but of course
it's less expensive and it's lighter so
the engineer would be selecting given
the particular situation that he's
designing for would be selecting the
proper material so with this is a bit of
background what are some of the design
variables one has to consider when
laying out a proper boiler exhaust
system so these now are the design
variables if we start from the very top
here this is what the engineer has to
take in consideration or into
consideration before they start the
overall design and calculation what
about the local codes I mentioned the
insulating material a lot of times local
codes will dictate under what
circumstances certain materials have to
be used for instance I'm concerned about
maybe a combustible wall I might be
running a
a stacker of breaching through a
combustible wall I have to take it
through a chase possibly so the local
codes become very very important for the
engineer to make some of the initial
assumptions or initial criteria through
which he then is going to lay out the
entire design the next thing we have to
look at of course is the type of fuel we
mentioned that we're going to limit our
discussion today on natural gas but it
could be number two oil it could be
number six oil for goodness sakes but
natural gas of course is the prevalent
fuel and of course as you know it's got
a lot of methane in it and it's it's
primarily a lot of hydrogen so it's
going to create a lot of condensate and
that condensate is going to occur at a
temperature of about a hundred and
thirty or 135 degrees so you can have a
border that's operating at 100 pounds
pressure which is three hundred and
thirty-eight degrees but you still could
get into a situation of that if that
breaching and stack has not been
properly designed where even though
you're coming out of that stack and say
close to four hundred degrees by the
time it gets to the stack it could be
down to dew point and that becomes very
very important of course if you've got
an oil fuel that dew points even higher
you're talking 235 240 degrees with
number-two oil so that becomes a huge
consideration the type of fuel I'll be
burning what's the flue gas temperature
as I mentioned becomes important what
about the appliance category so now that
I've got all of this I know the type of
fuel I know what the flue gas
temperature is going to be now I can
begin to make decisions on the category
that I'm going to be using as far as my
stack material is concerned is a
category three or will it be category
four if I'm near condensing I'll go with
category four what about the altitude
what's the altitude going to do for me
well as we go up in elevation of course
the air becomes what less dense right so
this impacts my pressure density
differential in the ability of my stack
to pull the proper negative if you will
and be able to vent properly so altitude
is a huge concern as well if I'm at sea
level I don't
worry about it but if I'm in Denver it's
a major concern and what about the flue
gas velocity of course this has to do
with temperature and mass flow so how
many borders do I have connected to that
breaching and how much mass flow do I
have what's the diameter of the
breaching what is the velocity going to
be this then of course also gets when I
start knowing what the velocity and mass
flow are and then the velocity I can
begin to calculate the resistance to
flow the pressure drop the other thing
is this the summer versus winter you
know I've got situations where the
border might draft very very where this
the stack and breaching will drop well
let's say in the winter time but in the
summertime when I lose my temperature
delta T it doesn't do very well and the
relative relative humidity goes up so I
got to take these things into
consideration too what about size making
wind loads stack and breaching diameter
height and length now I begin to
calculate that and then I have to also
when I'm doing that and I'm laying it
out I have to think about other things
like where are the flow restrictions do
I have tees and elbows what about whys
and dampers and reducers these will all
affect the resistance to flow and
increase the pressure drop and speaking
about wise well here's a good example
I'm coming out of this boiler and coming
into the stack but notice I don't
bullhead into it I don't just key into
it I use a Y to sweep the products of
combustion into the stack try to impede
the resistance to flow as much as I
possibly can now here's another example
of a wide connection but in this
particular case I've got a condensing
boiler I'm coming from the border into
my common breaching but I do it with a Y
so I sweep into it I don't impede flow
and then go into an insulated chase
between the walls and up through up
through the roof and outside and of
course as you can see this particular
stack and breaching material is a
category for full condensing now I would
be remiss if I didn't mention
this at this particular time there are
differences out there in terms of design
various manufacturers we all build
basically the same thing but the way the
the stack and breaching go together
there are differences there there are
some people that use a just a flange
where you you take the two sections
together you in the the flanges then but
together you seal and band them in this
particular case it's a male-female
connection why does that help it helps
in the overall assembly it reduces the
amount of time it takes to put these
sections together so when you're when
you're choosing these materials look at
the manufacturer and how they go
together how does how are these stack
and breaching sections designed are they
butted flanges or are they male/female
connections which in fact could save
some labour out there in the field now
we get into some of these draft
conditions that vary in this particular
case what I have is I've got a I've got
a high stack and that's all I'm not
concerning myself with anything other
than a trade stack draft that might vary
based on the season in the winter time I
may have more draft than I do in the
summer time and so what I've got is a
mechanical damper here that I can set so
I know that when I modulate that burner
from low to high fire I've got just the
amount of resistance either I increase
the resistance or I decrease the
resistance to be able to handle that
particular draft situation throughout
the firing rate during that season I
might have to adjust it in the winter or
I may have to adjust it again in the
summer but it's just a mechanical damper
so sometimes those are used other times
where the variation could be quite
extreme and it's impacted by velocity
outside and you know wind velocities
down drafts varying temperatures
barometric pressures and so on where I
really get a lot of variance then I may
want to go
with an automatic stack damper that you
see right here that's tied into a
pressure sensor that then is measuring
the amount of negative or positive we
meant within that stack and then
adjusting automatically the damper to
suit that variance now in some cases
especially where I've got a retrofit and
I've added a couple of boilers
I kept the existing breaching I don't
have money to to add any more to it I
know I can make this thing work if I put
in an induced draught fan and those
induced draught fans can either be
mounted in the vertical stack as you see
here or they could be mounted in the
horizontal and thereby overcome the
resistance to flow
mechanically driving those products of
combustion to the stack and up and out
so that might be another thing the other
thing that we we run into often with
stack and reaching our low budget
situations where a boiler has been added
and they want to use the existing stack
and this could be a total retrofit maybe
was an old coal-fired plant the border
came out and new borders went in the
budget as I said is a problem they want
to use the existing chimney well we're
going to have problems of that existing
chimney if we don't take some
precautionary action here and that would
be with a stack liner so rather than
going with a separate stack as you see
here on the Left we're going to use that
existing chimney and do what we can with
it so we're going to run a liner in
there so we will keep it from the
products of combustion from condensing
and degrading the masonry and still bent
properly as though we were taking those
products of combustion into a brand new
stack so when everything is all said and
done you've got that liner coming
through the chimney and up and out to
the atmosphere as you see here now for
those in the United States
sir in the UL if you else are in the
u.s. I should say it's ul 1777 would be
the the ul certification number and in
Canada it's you LCS 6:35 for those liner
materials and of course we're looking at
in those particular situations that are
certified by ul we're looking at
temperatures that would not exceed 570
degrees so with that then is a bit of
background I thought it would be a good
idea at this point to have my associate
here Chuck Zinda take us through a
couple of scenarios and you know what he
goes through when he's properly
engineering and designing a stack and
breeching layout so Chuck all right
thanks Steve the first time the first
project and we're looking at is a new
multi-story manufacturing in solutions
to four straps orders and the mechanics
as depicted in this engineers drawing
that was submitted for bid these borders
are firing natural gas operating at 100
psi with a projected stack temperature
of 360 degrees Fahrenheit the boilers
will operate in a fully modulating lead
lag setup with one or both boilers
firing at the same time depending on the
production load looking at the elevation
view in the middle of the drawing you'll
see that the engineer are shown one
boiler connecting to the chimney with a
90 degree T and the second boiler
entering the chimney just above the
first boiler connection with a 45 degree
Y connection our factory engineers a
draft calculation on all quote requests
that we received which we'll see in the
next slide here I've highlighted that in
the draft calculation
the 90 degree degree key connection that
was designed that was shown in the
design engineers drawing which gives us
a veil abode raft down here at the
bottom we show the available draught
calculated at a positive point zero zero
six inches water column now it's pretty
small amount above zero but still our
calculation calculation is showing that
as a too small of a diameter so we want
to aid in the evacuation of the exhaust
gases so we're going to size the
breaching and chimney to achieve a
slight negative draft at the boiler
exhaust outlet in this case we have a
slight positive so we're going to take a
look at this again and see what else we
can come up with a positive draft
available could cause a buildup of back
pressure at the entrance to the chimney
causing burner combustion issues
resulting in potential boiler heat
transfer issues that Steve had
previously discussed now using the draft
calculation that we just performed as a
starting point we're going to consider
changing that that 90 degree T in the
original engineers layout to a 45 degree
why we're showing here at the bottom
running the new calculation based on
that you'll notice that we've taken out
the 90 degree T connection we've
replaced that with a 45 degree T
connection and the resulting draft
calculation shows us with that negative
point zero five three inches water
column which is what we're looking for
and our draft calculation says okay so
that was just all we needed to do on
this particular application and we came
up with a solution to that problem this
45 degree Y offers a more laminar flow
to the exhaust gas whether one or both
the boilers are operating
in our next application the project
we're looking at which just came in to
us recently is a boiler replacement in
an existing facility two older
non-condensing steel boilers are being
replaced with two condensing boilers
utilizing the existing chimney chase the
last boiler in line is 30 feet from the
chimney with a straight breaching run
combining both boilers these are heating
boilers firing natural gas with a low
return water temperature resulting in a
lower stack temperature approximately
200 degrees Fahrenheit as shown in a
previous slide by Steve a common
misperception is to size the breaching
diameter the same size as the boiler gas
outlet the border exhaust gas outlet for
the entire run from both boilers to the
chimney we're going to take a look at a
draft calculation using that single size
diameter breaching now I've highlighted
a spot here in the draft calc where we
did not include an increase or which we
would normally consider but we're going
to go with the example we talked about
is using a same size diameter breaching
which is a 12 inch for the boiler
exhaust fitting showing us that we're
going to have an available draft of a
positive point 1 1 6 inches water column
again the calculation is telling us it's
too small of a diameter this confirms
Steve's earlier discussions about not
considering the increase in mass flow
when adding a second boiler to the
exhaust system resulting in back
pressure increases and poor burner
operations including pilot failures for
the downstream boiler the condensing
style boilers are more susceptible to
these pressure fluctuations if we
consider an increase or in the breaching
as shown here in this elevation view at
the point of entry of the second boiler
exhaust we have now increased the
cross-sectional area of the breaching to
handle that increase in
s vol now let's take a look at that
revised draft calculation here I've
highlighted the fact that we've put an
increase or into our calculations into
the flu or breaching run and our flu
diameters 18 inches at with both boilers
as shown here resulting in an available
draft of negative point zero seven zero
inches water column which is what we're
looking for which gives us the okay sign
that we've got an acceptable draft for
these boilers to operate Steve these are
just two examples of the design issues
that our factory engineers see on a
daily basis they review all of the
exhaust system requests that we receive
for proper design and they perform draft
calculations to ensure that the boiler
and exhaust system operates efficiently
okay well thank you chuck very much I
appreciate that let's sev in summary
let's let's what are the takeaways from
what we've talked about so far this
afternoon the main point I would like to
get across or points I'd like to get
across as are exactly what I hear on the
screen right now that an exhaust system
is an integral part of the overall
boiler operating system if you will it's
just as important as anything else on
that border or anything else in that
boiler room it's part of the system and
of course improper exhausting can lead
to expensive results not just additional
fuel but maintenance downtime and so on
so keeping these things in mind when a
boiler is added or when new borders are
being installed another ones being but
let's say replace like I mentioned
before an old coal-fired plant being
replaced with gas or oil fired boilers
these the exhausting the venting of
these new borders becomes very very
important especially if the existing
stack or chimney is being used
ventilation air very very important that
ventilation air be
be part of this and let me just give you
an example in the very beginning we have
to make sure that the the border room
itself has got enough ventilation air
and what we use as a rule of thumb is
ten CFM per border horsepower h CFM for
combustion and two for ventilation not
to keep you comfortable but to make sure
that that room does not go negative okay
or does not go positive I should say we
want to make sure that we do not go
positive in the boiler room itself
okay now the the other problem that we
have is so we've got 10 CFM for boiler
horsepower now how does that equate to
the proper cross-sectional area for
ventilation if you take a 300 horsepower
border if we add 10 CFM for boiler
horsepower that's 3000 right so we've
got a total of 3000 cubic feet divide
that if you've got a ceiling that is 7
feet or lower let's say 7 feet you
divide that by 250 by 250 and that will
give you the cross sectional area that
you need to properly vent that boiler
room if the ceiling is higher than 7
feet then you divide by 500 so you take
that 3000 divided by 500 that would give
you the cross-sectional area for
ventilation and combustion air so these
are the things one must understand the
very old the variables before laying out
a stack and breaching system obviously
the proper material selection based on
the category becomes important we went
through those today
category you know we stress category 3 &
4 but of course you may get involved
with categories 1 & 2 as well with
atmospheric gas fired appliances or
that could you know become positive in
that breaching or stack in which case it
would be a category two so in the last
thing of course stack and breaching
designs vary and one must be aware of
those systems which not only provide the
solution for the conditions but
installation savings as well so there's
there's differences out there relative
to how these stack materials go together
that can certainly impact the overall
installation cost so I think those are
the takeaways if we take a look at those
six bullets if you've got nothing more
out of this webinar today then taking
those back with you
I think you've accomplished a lot in
rehab as well so with that I'll open it
up to questions thank you Steve and
thank you Chuck very much at this time
if you would like to ask Steve or Chuck
a question please present it in the Q&A
tool of the WebEx control panel and if
you would make sure that it is that you
select all panelists so that we're in
different areas and we can each see what
the question is and we can get it
answered appropriately while we're
waiting for those questions to come in I
just want to reiterate that today's
presentation will be archived and
located on the cleaver Brookes website
you can see today's presentation and
it's full audio and video and you can
also download a PDF of the slide
presentation today frustration is one of
the ones that we've had in previous
month next month our topic will be the
right Buller for the application we'll
look at the different types of
applications and then give an
application what are the issues that you
might incur encounter during the
decision-making process and then what
type Bowler types best address those
issues if you'd like a little additional
information on next month's topic be
sure to visit the website at cleaver
Swisscom forward slash webinars and with
that we do have a couple of questions
that are already in so I'm going to just
let you volley it back and forth Chuck
and Steve as as you see fit one of the
first questions we received earlier in
the presentation was what types of
problem
arise with common stacks serving
multiple while our common stack serving
multiple bowlers that is sized for full
installed capacity is there a
recommended minimum turndown as a
percent of install or capacity to ensure
proper Draft at all times well let me
take a whack at that first Chuck if I
might if you've got a number of orders
connected to a common breaching and
stack you're going to have to make sure
that the it has been designed to be able
to handle the maximum so it would be the
maximum turndown in other words each one
of those is going to have to be sized as
though they are all operating at 100%
capacity otherwise you're going to get
into problems meant in this in that
particular situation you could also get
into an oversize condition where maybe
those dampers that we talked about the
automatic damper would be sensing the
excess of negative pole within the
breaching and stack and as a result
would begin to pinch off and increase
the resistance because you know with
these which what you're looking at is
either zero zero draft at the bent stub
or slightly negative that's what that's
the ideal condition that Chuck was was
actually driving at when he was going
through those two scenarios now there
are some border manufacturers that can
based on the border burner package you
can tolerate plus or minus a quarter
inch plus or minus a half inch but that
depends upon the manufacturer so it'd be
a good idea for the engineer who's ever
involved in laying out that stack and
breaching arrangement that they
understand what border is being
connected to it they contact the
manufacturer and ask whether or not they
can
under what conditions they can operate
without adversely affecting combustion
okay thanks Steve and if there's
information that is needed in addition
to that there is a number on at the end
of the PowerPoint there's a slide for
more for additional information so you
can feel free to call Chuck did the
email him or give him a phone phone call
next question we have do all stacks have
to be double wall and I kind of long
with that is the exterior on double wall
stacks available in one of the stainless
steel grades and then again please could
you repeat that yes the material do all
do all stacks has to be double wall and
along with that is the exterior on
double wall stacks available in one of
the stainless steel grates oh they don't
they don't have to be double wall it's a
kind of a protection issue insulating
issue you know if it's going through a
wall or a roof section we've provided
many single wall stacks as far as
stainless it is available for the
exterior wall for the outer wall and 304
316 a number of different materials
we've selected aluminized steel as kind
of a standard it's a cost issue mostly
it's a cost issue but we've provided
aluminized steel on the interior section
of the stack and and stainless steel on
the outer the exterior that's exposed to
the atmosphere
okay next question you mentioned suiting
of the bowler heat transfer services
called an efficiency loss how much soot
to equal a one percent loss in
efficiency well I can handle that one
Chuck I think if you're looking at let's
say anywhere from US sixteenth of an
inch to an eighth of an inch of soot on
the heat transfer surface of the boiler
you're going to see some elevated
temperatures you're going to see the
temperature of that stack rise quite
predominantly and - exactly you know
what is going to equate to the is it
going to go up 40 degrees from the bench
mark maybe in which case it's a 1
percent loss so you're going to see a
dramatic increase when you see so that
is let's say a sixteenth of an inch to
an eighth of an entry of dramatic
increase in temperature and for every 40
degrees over the bench mark you're going
to lose a percent of fuel efficiency all
right next question
okay there's understanding of the need
for adequate combustion air but how do
you calculate the free area how do you
handle cold air temperatures entering
the blower room well as I mentioned
before as far as the free area is
concerned you use 10 CFM per boarder
horsepower and depending upon the height
of the ceiling in the boiler room itself
7 feet you would divide by 250 if it's
over 7 feet you divide by 500 and that
would give you the cross sectional area
you would then divide that in half and
put 1/2 of that opening on one side of
the border room and 1/2 on the other 7
feet or lower now if it's cold
temperatures and you've got this this
open area let's say it's louvered you
can have you can have dampers put on
there that are tied into the control
circuit of the boiler or boilers
and would only power open under those
conditions when the borders are firing
and then would would drive shut when the
borders are down of course and the
borders are firing it's going to warm up
that border room considerably and
normally if you're talking temperatures
outside of 10 15 degrees 20 degrees
something like that it doesn't really
cause a problem when you get into some
real cold temperatures say northern
Canada or even here in the states and
the lower 48 or 50 you you're going to
be get into certain situations where
it's really really cold in that case
you're going to have to probably think
about you know air heaters or electric
resistance something to heat that air
before it comes in
okay Steve what about how to sealed
combustion factor into the resolve
calculations you want to take that chunk
sealed combustion and you in in sealed
combustion of course what you've got is
you've got air being ducted into the
burner itself and then you've got your
your stack your your event going out in
a separate system many times that that
ducted air as far as secondary air for
combustion it's PVC pipe you want to
comment on that at all not sure how I
can answer that one if the question is
is what about the combustion air ducting
you mean how does it affect the
operation yeah I mean you've got to
calculate that as well in that one I'm
not sure how to answer that one in
particular I mean are you are you going
through the calculations on the on the
air coming in the secondary air coming
in for combustion obviously there's
resistance to flow there so you're going
to have to calculate the diameter of
that of that of the of the dust and air
duct so that was a right adequate air
right yeah and then obviously the the
way the
the way the vent would be calculated
would be the same as as though it was
not sealed combustion I'm talking now
about the vent pray outside correct so
yes to answer the the questioners
question definitely the the calculations
for ducting the secondary air supply for
combustion would be very similar to that
which is used for the venting of the
combustion air after a post combustion
okay and as I stated earlier if there's
additional information needed feel free
to email those questions to chuck and we
can distribute them through the company
to the best person to be able to answer
those questions for you
next question when would a mechanical
damper be added to an exhaust system
well we add the mechanical damper to
control the gas flow to give us the to
give us the correct amount a second here
to give us the correct draft if we have
too much draft we're going to want a
mechanical damper to control that to
control the flow and and the draft out
of there so we we can put them in you
could put either a mechanical open
closed and then be able to adjust or you
can put an automatic draft damper in to
control it to the preset a little more
precise especially if you have more than
one boiler involved we do that quite
often each each application has to be
looked at individually okay in the
scenarios that you gave Chuck on I see
both example showed an open chimney top
the question is what happens when it
rains
well what when it ranged what we do in
this part in these particular cases we
didn't have a cover on it
the inner wall is stainless steel so
corrosion won't be a major factor in
that but both systems that we show also
have drain tees installed at the bottom
of the stack for drainage of any
condensate or rain that may collect in
the stack all right and let's see we are
have time for just a couple more
questions can you recommend a good draft
inducer manufacturer well I can take
that yes a couple that I've come across
throughout the years exhaust Oh makes an
excellent induced draft fan that can and
most of the exhaust those that I've seen
amount in the vertical oftentimes right
on top of the stack the other company
that I've had a good experience with is
turn hland t ju r and l UND churn 'land
and i've seen those in the horizontal
breaching but i think they also make a
vertical appliance okay um next question
with a forced draft bowler burner
combination how do you know what is the
correct pressure within the stack plus
or minus for the bowler to operate
efficiently that's a excellent question
and that's kind of what gets back to
what I was mentioning before but what I
would suggest that the person do that's
getting involved with the stack and
breaching layout and design contact that
border manufacturer find out what they
can live with with that particular model
in a burner boiler combination like for
instance with cleaver Brooks and our
fire tube boilers we can we can you know
withstand plus or minus depending upon
the model plus or minus anywhere from a
quart
wrench to a half-inch of variance and
stack pressure without adversely
affecting the burner and combustion
there might be other people out there
that say look I've got to have zero and
that's it
zero what the vent stomach you give me
any variation I'm going to have problems
well that's fine then we just design
around it and if it didn't that means
that we've got to go to an induced
draught fan or we've got to do something
to enlarge the breaching or do something
with the resistance in terms of avoiding
the teas and going into y-type
connections whatever we can do in the
most economical way to give that border
what it needs in terms of draught is
what we have to do Steve this question
comes in would you suggest adding a
motorized damper at the exit of a
spoiler no I think that not just as a
carte blanche statement no I think that
the situation has to dictate the expense
don't do anything you don't have to do
if you get into a situation where you've
got a lot of variances as I mentioned
before caused by down drafts or vault
wind velocities or ambient temperatures
whatever it might be then it may be
prudent to take that step in and invest
in a induced draft system or an
automatic dampering system or whatever
but if you've got pretty good assurance
that the conditions are fairly stable
and then it's just a matter of properly
calculating the breaching and stack
diameters and lengths in order to be
able to you know accommodate the proper
draft my counselors don't spend anything
you don't have to okay I know that we
have a good many questions that have not
been answered as of yet don't fret
we have a copy of the questions and we
will be sure that we get you an answer
or contact you directly either by the
information that you submitted via email
or telephone call so go ahead and if you
still like to submit a question go ahead
and do that and what will
who is will make sure that it is
answered and getting gotten back to you
in a timely fashion again look for next
month's topic on our webpage cleaver
books comm forward slash webinars get a
copy of today's presentation voice and
audio plus a copy of a PDF that you can
use if you did not indicate that you
wanted a certificate of attendance
please do so through the survey that is
automatically sent to you as you exit
out of WebEx and we'll be sure that you
get your certificate at this time we are
only giving certificates for the live
events and not for any archived events
or events that are if you should go on
there and view at a later date you
should receive their certificates
between two to five business days but if
you don't receive it end and there is a
email address that you'll be able to
contact us I appreciate everybody's time
Thank You Chuck thank you Steve for a
good webinar and we will see you guys
next month on the 29th I believes is
when we are giving the next presentation
your closing comment Steve no that's it
thank you all again for for joining us
we really appreciate doing this we
appreciate your attendance all right
thank you so much Kevin right hey do
you
